Add a blog post with a clientcmd tutorial (#47263)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/clientcmd-tutorial.md

Reviewer: Overall, don't include the definite article in hyperlinks; we typically do not.

Reviewer: Please change the filename to match the pattern that others use, including the date in the filename. It's annoying to put it in but it makes finding the source article [given a URL] considerably easier.

Author: Of course! I wasn’t sure when this was supposed to be done.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Uniform API server access using clientcmd'
date: 2024-07-24
slug: clientcmd-tutorial
author: Stephen Kitt (Red Hat)
---

If you've ever wanted to develop a command-line client for a Kubernetes API,
especially if you’ve considered making your client usable as a `kubectl` plugin,
you might have wondered how to make your client feel familiar to users of `kubectl`.
A quick glance at the output of `kubectl options` might put a damper on that:

> “am I really supposed to implement all those options?”

Reviewer 2: “am I really supposed to implement all those options?”
“am I really supposed to implement all those options?”

> “am I really supposed to implement all those options?”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"Am I really supposed to implement all those options?"
```

Author: I used typographic quotes and apostrophes in text, and non-typographic quotes and apostrophes in code (so that readers can copy and paste). However I see that https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/ uses non-typographic quotes and apostrophes throughout, so I’ll switch to that.

Fear not, others have done a lot of the work involved for you.
In fact, the Kubernetes provides two libraries to help you handle
`kubectl`-style command-line options,
[`clientcmd`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd) and
[`cli-runtime`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/cli-runtime)
(which uses `clientcmd`).
This article will show how to use the former.

## General philosophy

> As might be expected since it’s part of `client-go`,

Author: “This …” reads more awkwardly to me than “As …” here.

> As might be expected since it’s part of `client-go`,

Reviewer: I agree; the original wording sounds fine.

`clientcmd`’s ultimate purpose is to provide an instance of
[`restclient.Config`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/rest#Config)
that can issue requests to an API server.

It follows `kubectl` semantics:
* defaults are taken from `~/.kube` or equivalent;
* files can be specified using the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable;

> * all the above can be further overridden using command-line arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* all of the above settings can be further overridden using command-line arguments.
```

> One major missing piece for full `kubectl`-style argument handling is support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One major missing piece for complete `kubectl` style argument handling is the support
```

Author: I’ve rephrased it:

```markdown
It doesn’t set up a `--kubeconfig` flag,
which you might want to do to align with `kubectl`;
you’ll see how to do this [later on](#bind-the-flags).
```

Reviewer 3: Thats good. Maybe you can rewrite the last one as `you'll see how to do this in [bind-the-flags] section later in this blog` Current one is ok as well. It just add some more direct reference here.

Reviewer 4: This was done, so this conversation can be resolved.

### Configure the loading rules

`clientcmd.NewDefaultClientConfigLoadingRules()` builds loading rules which will use either the contents of the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable,
or the default configuration file name (`~/.kube/config`).
In addition, if the default configuration file is used,
it is able to migrate settings from the (very) old default configuration file
(`~/.kube/.kubeconfig`).

You can build your own `ClientConfigLoadingRules`,
but in most cases the defaults are fine.

### Configure the overrides

`clientcmd.ConfigOverrides` is a `struct` storing overrides which will be applied over the settings loaded from the configuration derived using the loading rules.
In the context of this article,
its primary purpose is to store values obtained from command-line flags.

In most cases there’s nothing to set in the overrides;
we will only bind them to flags.

### Build a set of flags

Three sets of flags are available:

* authentication flags (certificates, tokens, impersonations, username/password);
* cluster flags (API server, certificate authority, TLS configuration, proxy, compression)
* context flags (cluster name, `kubeconfig` user name, namespace)

> The recommended selection includes all three of the above, plus a named context selection flag and a timeout flag.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The recommended selection includes all three with a named context selection flag and a timeout flag.
```

These are all available using the `Recommended…Flags` functions.
The functions take a prefix, which is prepended to all the flags.

So calling
[`clientcmd.RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags("")`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags)
results in flags including `--context`, `--namespace`, and so on.
The `--timeout` flag is given a default of 0,
and the `--namespace` flags has a corresponding short variant, `-n`.
Adding a prefix, _e.g._ `"from-"`, results in flags such as
`--from-context`, `--from-namespace`, etc.
This might not seem particularly useful on commands involving a single API server,
but they come in handy when multiple API servers are involved,

> *e.g.* in multi-cluster scenarios.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
such as in multi-cluster scenarios.
```

As the names suggest, the difference between the two is that the first
can ask for authentication information interactively,
using a provided reader,
whereas the second only operates on the information given to it by the caller.

The “deferred” mention in these function names refers to the fact that
the final configuration will be determined as late as possible.
This means that these functions can be called before the command-line flags are parsed,
and the resulting configuration will use whatever values have been parsed
by the time it’s actually constructed.

### Obtain an API client

The merged configuration is returned as a
[`ClientConfig`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#ClientConfig) instance.
An API client can be obtained from that by calling the `ClientConfig()` method.

If no configuration is given
(`KUBECONFIG` is empty or points to non-existent files,
`~/.kube/config` doesn’t exist,
and no configuration is given using command-line flags),
the default setup will return an obscure error referring to `KUBERNETES_MASTER`.
This is legacy behaviour;
several attempts have been made to get rid of it,

> but it is preserved for `kubectl`’s `--local` and `--dry-run` flags.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but it is preserved for `--local` and `--dry-run` flags of `kubectl`.
```

Author: OK, that avoids a possessive on a formatted command; it needs an extra “the” however:

```suggestion
but it is preserved for the `--local` and `--dry-run` flags in `--kubectl`.
```

Reviewer 3: yeah . that looks better.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Uniform API server access using clientcmd'
date: 2024-07-24
slug: clientcmd-tutorial
author: >
  [Stephen Kitt](https://github.com/skitt) (Red Hat)
---

If you've ever wanted to develop a command-line client for a Kubernetes API,

> especially if you’ve considered making your client usable as a `kubectl` plugin,

Reviewer: Optionally:
```suggestion
and especially if you’ve considered making your client usable as a
[kubectl plugin](/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/),
```

if err != nil {
	// Do something
}
client, err := metav1.New(config)
// ...
```

In the context of this article, there are six steps:

1. Configure the loading rules.
1. Configure the overrides.
1. Build a set of flags.
1. Bind the flags.
1. Build the merged configuration.
1. Obtain an API client.

### Configure the loading rules

`clientcmd.NewDefaultClientConfigLoadingRules()` builds loading rules which will use either the contents of the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable,
or the default configuration file name (`~/.kube/config`).
In addition, if the default configuration file is used,
it is able to migrate settings from the (very) old default configuration file
(`~/.kube/.kubeconfig`).

You can build your own `ClientConfigLoadingRules`,
but in most cases the defaults are fine.

### Configure the overrides

`clientcmd.ConfigOverrides` is a `struct` storing overrides which will be applied over the settings loaded from the configuration derived using the loading rules.
In the context of this article,
its primary purpose is to store values obtained from command-line flags.

In most cases there’s nothing to set in the overrides;
we will only bind them to flags.

> ### Build a set of flags

Reviewer: Although Go calls these things flags, the wider world of IT uses “flag“ most commonly to mean a boolean. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flag_(programming) for more context.

For example, `--enable-foo` is a flag but `--foo-path=/tmp` is not.

To help readers, especially those new to Kubernetes or less experienced in Go, call them command line arguments. You can also use _flag_ when you are talking about the Go library code specifically.

Author: That’s a good point, thanks! I’ve reworked the sections discussing flags, to avoid using “flag” where it should be “command line argument”, and to clarify what is meant by “flag” (really, the `FlagInfo` `struct` — that explains the `clientcmd` function names ending with `Flags`). I’ve also dropped the “command-line” hyphen, and a mention of “options” instead of “arguments”.

Three sets of flags are available:

* authentication flags (certificates, tokens, impersonations, username/password);
* cluster flags (API server, certificate authority, TLS configuration, proxy, compression)
* context flags (cluster name, `kubeconfig` user name, namespace)

The recommended selection includes all three with a named context selection flag and a timeout flag.

These are all available using the `Recommended…Flags` functions.
The functions take a prefix, which is prepended to all the flags.

So calling
[`clientcmd.RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags("")`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags)
results in flags including `--context`, `--namespace`, and so on.
The `--timeout` flag is given a default of 0,
and the `--namespace` flags has a corresponding short variant, `-n`.

> Adding a prefix, _e.g._ `"from-"`, results in flags such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a prefix such as `"from-"` results in command line arguments such as
```

An API client can be obtained from that by calling the `ClientConfig()` method.

If no configuration is given
(`KUBECONFIG` is empty or points to non-existent files,
`~/.kube/config` doesn’t exist,
and no configuration is given using command-line flags),
the default setup will return an obscure error referring to `KUBERNETES_MASTER`.
This is legacy behaviour;
several attempts have been made to get rid of it,
but it is preserved for the `--local` and `--dry-run` flags in `--kubectl`.
You should check for “empty configuration” errors by calling `clientcmd.IsEmptyConfig()`
and provide a more explicit error message.

The `Namespace()` method is also useful:
it returns the namespace that should be used.
It also indicates whether the namespace was overridden by the user
(using `--namespace`).

## Full example

Here’s a complete example.

```lang-go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"os"

	"github.com/spf13/pflag"
	v1 "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1"
	"k8s.io/client-go/kubernetes"
	"k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd"
)

func main() {
	// Loading rules, no configuration
	loadingRules := clientcmd.NewDefaultClientConfigLoadingRules()

> 	// Overrides and flag setup

Reviewer: Here's one way to reconcile `github.com/spf13/pflag` with the jargon from the wider world of IT.
```suggestion
	// Overrides and flag (command line option) setup
```

Reviewer 4: This was done, so this conversation can be resolved.

"(command line argument)" was added.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Uniform API server access using clientcmd'

> date: 2024-07-24

Reviewer 5: Looks like proposed publication date of July 24th has passed and the content has not yet been published. The [blog team](https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/teams/sig-docs-blog-owners) would need to provide a new publication date.

_(New publication date will also result in update of date in the blog's front matter and the file name changed [2024-MM-DD-clientcmd-tutorial.md].)_

Author: That’s just the date I created the file. @sftim mention publication in September.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-09-26T10:00:00-08:00
```

slug: clientcmd-tutorial
author: >
  [Stephen Kitt](https://github.com/skitt) (Red Hat)
---

If you've ever wanted to develop a command line client for a Kubernetes API,
especially if you've considered making your client usable as a `kubectl` plugin,
you might have wondered how to make your client feel familiar to users of `kubectl`.
A quick glance at the output of `kubectl options` might put a damper on that:
"Am I really supposed to implement all those options?"

Fear not, others have done a lot of the work involved for you.
In fact, the Kubernetes provides two libraries to help you handle

> `kubectl`-style command line arguments,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`kubectl`-style command line arguments in Go programs:
```

There are other programming languages! Let's not imply we didn't realize.

[`clientcmd`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd) and
[`cli-runtime`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/cli-runtime)
(which uses `clientcmd`).
This article will show how to use the former.

## General philosophy

As might be expected since it's part of `client-go`,
`clientcmd`'s ultimate purpose is to provide an instance of
[`restclient.Config`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/rest#Config)
that can issue requests to an API server.

It follows `kubectl` semantics:
* defaults are taken from `~/.kube` or equivalent;
* files can be specified using the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable;
* all of the above settings can be further overridden using command line arguments.

It doesn't set up a `--kubeconfig` command line argument,
which you might want to do to align with `kubectl`;
you'll see how to do this

> [in the "Bind the flags" section](#bind-the-flags).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the [Bind the flags](#bind-the-flags) section.
```

## Available features

`clientcmd` allows programs to handle

* `kubeconfig` selection (using `KUBECONFIG`);
* context selection;
* namespace selection;

> * client certificates;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* client certificates and private keys;
```
The certificate is what you authenticate as; the key is what you authenticate with. Kinda.

* user impersonation;

> * basic authentication support (username/password).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* HTTP Basic authentication support (username/password).
```

## Configuration merging

In various scenarios, `clientcmd` supports _merging_ configuration settings:
`KUBECONFIG` can specify multiple files whose contents are combined.
This can be confusing, because settings are merged in different directions
depending on how they are implemented.
If a setting is defined in a map, the first definition wins,
subsequent definitions are ignored.
If a setting is not defined in a map, the last definition wins.

When settings are retrieved using `KUBECONFIG`,
missing files result in warnings only.
If the user explicitly specifies a path (in `--kubeconfig` style),
there must be a corresponding file.

If `KUBECONFIG` isn't defined,
the default configuration file, `~/.kube/config`, is used instead,
if present.

### Overall process

The general usage pattern is succinctly expressed in

> [the package documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd):

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
the [package documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd):
```

Author: I changed it to

```suggestion
the [`clientcmd`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd) package documentation:
```

to match other similar links.

> ```lang-go

Reviewer 5: The language identifier needs correction to enable proper syntax highlighting.
_(see [preview page (here)](https://deploy-preview-47263--kubernetes-io-main-staging.netlify.app/blog/2024/07/24/clientcmd-tutorial/), no highlighting at present)_

```suggestion
```go
```

1. [Configure the loading rules](#configure-the-loading-rules).
1. [Configure the overrides](#configure-the-overrides).
1. [Build a set of flags](#build-a-set-of-flags).
1. [Bind the flags](#bind-the-flags).
1. [Build the merged configuration](#build-the-merged-configuration).
1. [Obtain an API client](#obtain-an-api-client).

### Configure the loading rules

`clientcmd.NewDefaultClientConfigLoadingRules()` builds loading rules which will use either the contents of the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable,
or the default configuration file name (`~/.kube/config`).
In addition, if the default configuration file is used,
it is able to migrate settings from the (very) old default configuration file
(`~/.kube/.kubeconfig`).

You can build your own `ClientConfigLoadingRules`,
but in most cases the defaults are fine.

### Configure the overrides

`clientcmd.ConfigOverrides` is a `struct` storing overrides which will be applied over the settings loaded from the configuration derived using the loading rules.
In the context of this article,
its primary purpose is to store values obtained from command line arguments.
These are handled using the [pflag](https://github.com/spf13/pflag) library,

> which is a drop-in replacement for Go's [flag package](https://pkg.go.dev/flag),

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
which is a drop-in replacement for Go's [`flag`](https://pkg.go.dev/flag) package,
```

adding support for double-hyphen arguments with long names.

In most cases there's nothing to set in the overrides;
we will only bind them to flags.

### Build a set of flags

In this context, a flag is a representation of a command line argument,
specifying its long name (such as `--namespace`),
its short name if any (such as `-n`),
its default value,
and a description shown in the usage information.
Flags are stored in instances of

> [the `FlagInfo` `struct`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#FlagInfo).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [`FlagInfo`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#FlagInfo) struct.
```

We prefer using the title or name of the thing we're linking to as the hyperlink text.

Three sets of flags are available,
representing the following command line arguments:

* authentication arguments (certificates, tokens, impersonations, username/password);
* cluster arguments (API server, certificate authority, TLS configuration, proxy, compression)
* context arguments (cluster name, `kubeconfig` user name, namespace)

The recommended selection includes all three with a named context selection argument and a timeout argument.

These are all available using the `Recommended…Flags` functions.
The functions take a prefix, which is prepended to all the argument long names.

So calling
[`clientcmd.RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags("")`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags)

> results in flags including `--context`, `--namespace`, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
results in command line arguments such as `--context`, `--namespace`, and so on.
```

> The `--timeout` flag is given a default of 0,
> and the `--namespace` flags has a corresponding short variant, `-n`.

Reviewer: I recommend:
```suggestion
The `--timeout` argument is given a default of 0,
and the `--namespace` argument has a corresponding short variant, `-n`.
```

The actual things that you interact with as a user aren't flags, as least not as I see it.

Adding a prefix, such as `"from-"`, results in command line arguments such as
`--from-context`, `--from-namespace`, etc.
This might not seem particularly useful on commands involving a single API server,
but they come in handy when multiple API servers are involved,
such as in multi-cluster scenarios.

There's a potential gotcha here: prefixes don't modify the short name,
so `--namespace` needs some care if multiple prefixes are used:
only one of the prefixes can be associated with the `-n` short name.
You'll have to clear the short names associated with the other prefixes'
`--namespace` , or perhaps all prefixes if there's no sensible
`-n` association.
Short names can be cleared as follows:

> ```lang-go

Reviewer 5: The language identifier needs correction to enable proper syntax highlighting.

```suggestion
```go
```

kflags := clientcmd.RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags(prefix)
kflags.ContextOverrideFlags.Namespace.ShortName = ""
```

In a similar fashion, flags can be disabled entirely by clearing their long name:

> ```lang-go

Reviewer 5: The language identifier needs correction to enable proper syntax highlighting.

```suggestion
```go
```

kflags.ContextOverrideFlags.Namespace.LongName = ""
```

### Bind the flags

Once a set of flags has been defined,
it can be used to bind command line arguments to overrides using
[`clientcmd.BindOverrideFlags`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#BindOverrideFlags).
This requires a
[`pflag`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/spf13/pflag) `FlagSet`
rather than one from Go's flag package.

If you also want to bind `--kubeconfig`, you should do so now,
by binding `ExplicitPath` in the loading rules:

> ```lang-go

Reviewer 5: The language identifier needs correction to enable proper syntax highlighting.

```suggestion
```go
```

and the resulting configuration will use whatever values have been parsed
by the time it's actually constructed.

### Obtain an API client

The merged configuration is returned as a
[`ClientConfig`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd#ClientConfig) instance.
An API client can be obtained from that by calling the `ClientConfig()` method.

If no configuration is given
(`KUBECONFIG` is empty or points to non-existent files,
`~/.kube/config` doesn't exist,
and no configuration is given using command line arguments),
the default setup will return an obscure error referring to `KUBERNETES_MASTER`.
This is legacy behaviour;
several attempts have been made to get rid of it,
but it is preserved for the `--local` and `--dry-run` command line arguments in `--kubectl`.
You should check for "empty configuration" errors by calling `clientcmd.IsEmptyConfig()`
and provide a more explicit error message.

The `Namespace()` method is also useful:
it returns the namespace that should be used.
It also indicates whether the namespace was overridden by the user
(using `--namespace`).

## Full example

Here's a complete example.

> ```lang-go

Reviewer 5: The language identifier needs correction to enable proper syntax highlighting.

```suggestion
```go
```

	configOverrides := &clientcmd.ConfigOverrides{}
	flags := pflag.NewFlagSet("clientcmddemo", pflag.ExitOnError)
	clientcmd.BindOverrideFlags(configOverrides, flags,
		clientcmd.RecommendedConfigOverrideFlags(""))
	flags.StringVarP(&loadingRules.ExplicitPath, "kubeconfig", "", "", "absolute path(s) to the kubeconfig file(s)")
	flags.Parse(os.Args)

	// Client construction
	kubeConfig := clientcmd.NewNonInteractiveDeferredLoadingClientConfig(loadingRules, configOverrides)
	config, err := kubeConfig.ClientConfig()
	if err != nil {
		if clientcmd.IsEmptyConfig(err) {
			panic("Please provide a configuration pointing to the Kubernetes API server")
		}
		panic(err)
	}
	client, err := kubernetes.NewForConfig(config)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	// How to find out what namespace to use
	namespace, overridden, err := kubeConfig.Namespace()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Printf("Chosen namespace: %s; overridden: %t\n", namespace, overridden)

	// Let's use the client
	nodeList, err := client.CoreV1().Nodes().List(context.TODO(), v1.ListOptions{})
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	for _, node := range nodeList.Items {
		fmt.Println(node.Name)
	}
}

> ```

Reviewer: I'd wrap up the article with a next step, even if that's as simple as “Happy coding!”.
